To set up communication between switch 1 and switch 2
these ports needs to be configured as a trunk port
I’m also gonna configure this port as trunk port
so that we can capture traffic
and see the encapsulated frames between the switches.
Starting with switch 1 the first thing I’m gonna do is to make everything static
so switchport mode access on gigabit 0/0
and then switchport nonegotiate to disable DTP to something similar
on gigabit 0/1  switchport mode access switchport nonegotiate.
do sh run
so this port 0/0 is configured as an access port in VLAN 1 DTP is disabled.
Gigabit 0/1 is configured as an access port in VLAN 2, DTP is disabled.
So we now need to configure ports 2 and 3 as trunk ports and disable DTP
so int g0/2 switchport mode trunk
and it’s gonna fail as you can see there
because we have to type switchport trunk encapsulation
and in this example we'll use dot1q
and then switchport mode trunk to make it a trunk port.
A trunk port allows multiple VLANs to traverse that port
switchport nonegotiate let’s do something similar
on port 3 set the encapsulation to dot1q
set the mode to trunk, disabled DTP and then I'll no shut those 2 ports.
So sh int g0/2 switchport
This command shows us that gigabit 0/2 is enabled as a layer 2 interface
it's been administratively  configured as a trunk
and it's operating as a trunk.
The encapsulation used is dot1q that how it was configured
and that’s how it’s operating.
DTP has been disabled.
The native VLAN or untagged VLAN on this link is VLAN 1.
All VLANs are allowed across the trunk.
now we can also use the command show interfaces trunk
that shows us a nice summary of information
so port 2 and port 3 have been manually configured for trunking using 802.1Q
they are currently trunking the native VLAN as VLAN 1.
VLANs 1 to 4094 are permitted on those ports
the VLANs allowed and active in the management domain are VLANs 1 to 2.
VLANs in the Spanning Tree forwarding states on g0/2 is 1 and 2 and on 3 is 2.
So we’ve configured switch 1 with this port being access ports.
currently, this PC is in VLAN 2 and this PC is in VLAN 1
now can router 1 ping router 2 and router 3
and can routing 2 ping any of these routers?
So can router 1 turn off debugging here, ping 10.1.1.3, yes, it can.
Can I ping 10.1.1.4 yes it can.
This port allows VLAN 1 to traverse it using the untagged VLAN.
so the frame goes across this link as untagged frame
goes across this link as untagged frame
and then goes across this 2 links as untagged.
switch 2 hasn’t been configured for VLANs it's using a default config
so sh vlan brief on the switch
shows that only VLAN 1 exist on switch 2
so let’s put PC 4 into VLAN 2
and let’s see if PC 4 and PC 2 can ping each other.
Turn off debugging on router 2 acting as our PC
sh ip int brief
This PC has an IP address of 10.1.2.2
So I'll give this one an IP address of 10.1.2.4
it’s currently configured with this IP address so let’s change that.
10.1.2.4 ping 10.1.2.2 what you’ll notice is the pings failed.
Router 2 and router 4 cannot ping each other
and the question is why?
Why can’t they ping one another?
Well the first problem is, we haven’t configured VLAN 2 on this switch
switch 2 and we haven’t put this port into VLAN 2.
So on switch 2
I’m gonna set it to vtp mode transparent
so that we have to manually configure everything.
I'm gonna create VLAN 2
but notice please even though you create the VLAN
no ports are put into that VLAN by default.
So sh int g0/1 switchport
that’s this interface here, shows me that that port is in VLAN 1.
So what I need to do is go to that port.
switchport mode access to ensure that it's an access port, that is a default.
switchport access vlan 2
switchport nonegotiate
we'll turn off all auto negotiations
so that we have to manually configure everything
and then explain how it works.
So sh int g0/1 switchport
This port gigabit 0/1 is enabled
which using static access administrative mode
and it's operating a static access port, it's in VLAN 2 at the moment.
So will PC 2 be able to ping PC 4?
let's do the ping again
ping fails from router 4 to router 2
and it also fails in the reverse direction.
These 2 are not able to ping each other.
Let’s disable this port and force the traffic to go through the hub
and then do a Wireshark capture to see what’s going on.